Add info about column range tracking APIs (#3330)
timescale/docs: api/enable_column_stats.md

---
api_name: enable_column_stats()
excerpt: Enable range tracking for columns of chunks from a hypertable  
topics: [hypertables]
keywords: [hypertables, chunks, range-tracking]
tags: [columns, ranges, min-max, chunks]
api:
  license: apache
  type: function
---

# enable_column_stats()

> Allow users to specify that ranges (min/max values) be tracked

Reviewer: Track a range of values in a specific column of chunks in a hypertable.

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

for a specific column of chunks belonging to a hypertable.

### Required arguments

|Name|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|

> |`hypertable`|REGCLASS|Hypertable to which the column belongs to|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`hypertable`|REGCLASS|Hypertable that the column belongs to|
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

|`column_name`|TEXT|Column to track range statistics for|

### Optional arguments

|Name|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|

> |`if_not_exists`|BOOLEAN|Set to true to avoid throwing an error if ranges are already being tracked for the column. A notice is issued instead. Defaults to false|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`if_not_exists`|BOOLEAN|Set to `true` so that a notice is sent when ranges are not being tracked for a column. By default, an error is thrown.| |
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

### Returns

|Column|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`column_stats_id`|INTEGER|ID of the entry in the TimescaleDB internal catalog|

> |`enabled`|BOOLEAN|True if the tracking was enabled, true when `if_not_exists` is true and even if new entry was not added|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`enabled`|BOOLEAN|Returns `true` when tracking is enabled, `if_not_exists` is `true`, and when a new entry is not added|
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

<Highlight type="note">

>  As of now we support tracking min/max ranges for smallint, int,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB supports min/max range tracking for the `smallint`, `int`,
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  bigint, serial, bigserial, date, timestamp, timestamptz data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `bigint`, `serial`, `bigserial`, `date`, `timestamp`, and `timestamptz` data types.
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

</Highlight>

### Sample use

> First convert table `conditions` to hypertable with time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this sample, you convert the conditions table to a hypertable with
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

> partitioning on column `time`, then specify and enable additional columns to track ranges for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partitioning on the `time` column. You then specify and enable additional columns to track ranges for.
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

```sql
SELECT create_hypertable('conditions', 'time');
SELECT enable_column_stats('conditions', 'device_id');
```

<Highlight type="note">

>  It's recommended to enable range tracking on columns which are correlated to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Best practice is to enable range tracking on columns which are correlated to the
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  partitioning column. In other words, enable tracking on secondary columns which are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 partitioning column. In other words, enable tracking on secondary columns that are
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  referenced in WHERE clauses of queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 referenced in the `WHERE` clauses in your queries. 
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  The actual min/max ranges for such columns is calculated when a chunk belonging to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The min/max ranges are calculated when a chunk belonging to
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

 this hypertable is compressed using the [compress_chunk][compress_chunk] function.
 The range is stored in start (inclusive) and end (exclusive) form in the

>  "chunk_column_stats" catalog table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `chunk_column_stats` catalog table.
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  We can thus store the min/max values for such columns in this catalog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way you store the min/max values in the catalog
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  table at the per-chunk level. Note that these min/max range values do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 table at the per-chunk level. These min/max range values do
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  not participate in partitioning of the data. Such data ranges will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 not participate in partitioning of the data. These data ranges are
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  used for chunk pruning if the WHERE clause of an SQL query specifies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 used for chunk pruning when the WHERE clause of an SQL query specifies
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  ranges on such a column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ranges on the column.
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  A [DROP COLUMN](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-altertable.html#SQL-ALTERTABLE-DESC-DROP-COLUMN)

Reviewer: To remove all relevant entries from the catalog table, call [DROP COLUMN](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-altertable.html#SQL-ALTERTABLE-DESC-DROP-COLUMN)
 on a column with tracking enabled.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't make sense. Removal of entries is a by-product of calling `DROP COLUMN`. So this is not the way to remove entries.

 on a column with statistics tracking enabled on it ends up removing all relevant entries
 from the catalog table.

>  A [decompress_chunk][decompress_chunk] invocation on a compressed chunk resets its entries

Reviewer: To compressed chunk resets its column entries, call [decompress_chunk][decompress_chunk]. This resets entries
 from the "chunk_column_stats" catalog table.

Reviewer 2: again reset of entries is a by-product of calling decompress_chunk. We don't use decompress_chunk to reset the entries.
